.Dd Sep 12, 2021
.Dt PIMCTL 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pimctl
.Nd Control tool for
.Xr pimd 8
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm pimctl
.Op Fl mpthv
.Op Fl i Ar NAME
.Op Fl u Ar FILE
.Op COMMAND
.Nm
.Ar help | kill | restart | status | version
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar debug Op ? | none | SYSTEM Op ,SYSTEM
.Nm
.Ar log Op ? | none | LEVEL
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar show igmp
.Pp
.Nm
.Ar show interface
.Nm
.Ar show neighbor
.Nm
.Ar show mrt Op detail
.Nm
.Ar show rp
.Nm
.Ar show crp
.Nm
.Ar show compat Op detail
.Nm
.Ar show pim Op detail
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the friendly control tool for
.Xr pimd 8 ,
.Xr pimdd 8 ,
and
.Xr pim6sd 8 .
It can be used to query status, debug, restart, and kill a running PIM
daemon.  Commands can be abbreviated to the minimum unambiguous prefix;
for example,
.Cm s in
for
.Cm show interface .
.Sh OPTIONS
This program follows the usual UNIX command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').  The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h, -help
Show usage instructions and exit.
.It Fl i, -ident Ar NAME
Connect to named PIM daemon instance.  Since the same
.Nm
is capable supporting all the PIM daemon's it comes with heuristics to
aid the user, i.e., if only one of the supported daemon's is running
this option is not required.
.It Fl m, -monitor
Run
.Op Ar COMMAND
every two seconds, for limited systems that do not have
.Xr watch 1 ,
which is highly recommended with
.Nm .
.It Fl p, -plain
Use plain table headings, no ANSI ctrl characters.  When using
.Xr watch 1 ,
use
.Cm watch Fl c
option instead, it handles ANSI escape sequences.
.It Fl t, -no-heading
Skip table headings altogether.  Useful for scripting
.Nm .
.It Fl u, -ipc Ar FILE
Override UNIX domain socket filename, the default is based on the
identity,
.Fl i Ar NAME .
On most systems this is
.Pa /var/run/pimd.sock .
.El
.Sh COMMANDS
The
.Nm
tool from this project can be used with any of the other PIM daemons,
so the available commands vary.  When a PIM daemon is running the
.Nm
tool querys it over IPC for available commands.  The
.Nm pimd
daemon comes with the following commands:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Nm Ar help
Show usage instructions and exit.
.It Nm Ar kill
Kill running daemon, like sending SIGTERM to the PIM daemon.
.It Nm Ar restart
Restart daemon and reload
.Pa /etc/pimd.conf ,
like sending SIGHUP to the PIM daemon.
.It Nm Ar status
Show PIM daemon status.
.It Nm Ar debug Op ? | none | SYSTEM Op ,SYSTEM
Control subystem debugging at runtime.  Multiple subsystems can be
enabled, separate with comma.  E.g.
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
pimctl debug igmp,pim
.Ed
.Pp
The command returns a list of enabled subsystems.  Without any debug
argument, the command lists the currently enabled subsystems.  To list
all available subsystems, use
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
pimctl debug ?
.Ed
.Pp
To disable all subsystems, use
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
pimctl debug none
.Ed
.Pp
Subsystems:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width pim_routes -compact -offset indent
.It Cm all
Enable all subsystems (may trigger log rate limiter)
.It Cm asserts
PIM assert messages
.It Cm bsr
PIM bootstrap router messages
.It Cm crp
PIM Candidate Rendez-Vous Point messages
.It Cm detail
Detailed PIM debug messages
.It Cm igmp
Debug IGMP messages
.It Cm interfaces
Show interface (VIF) debug messages
.It Cm jp
PIM join-prune messages
.It Cm kernel
Kernel debug messages
.It Cm mfc
Debug messages for the multicast forwarding cache (kernel)
.It Cm mrt
PIM routing messages
.It Cm neighbors
Debug hello messages to/from neighbors
.It Cm packets
Debug inbound/outbout packets
.It Cm pim
All PIM messages
.It Cm prunes
Pruning operations, or pruned routes
.It Cm registers
PIM register tunnel debug messages
.It Cm rpf
PIM revers-path forwarding debug messages
.It Cm rsrr
Debug RSRR messages
.It Cm timers
Debug timers
.It Cm traceroute
Multicast traceroute information
.El
.It Nm Ar log Op ? | none | LEVEL
Control, query, or disable the log level of the PIM daemon:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width WARNING -compact -offset indent
.It Cm none
Disable all logging
.It Cm error
Error conditions
.It Cm warning
Warning conditions
.It Cm notice
Normal but significant condition (Default)
.It Cm info
Informational
.It Cm debug
Debug-level messages
.El
.It Nm Ar show igmp
Show IGMP interface status and group memberships.
.It Nm Ar show interfaces
Show PIM interface table
.It Nm Ar show neighbor
Show PIM neighbor table
.It Nm Ar show mrt
Show PIM multicast routing table.  To see the actual multicast
forwarding cache (mfc), see your operating system specific command.  The
MROUTING stack (used in most UNIX systems today) never developed socket
options to query the routing table, so every operating system has its
own method.  On Linux this is
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
ip mroute show
.Ed
.Pp
on BSD systems it is usually something like
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
netstat -g
.Ed
.Pp
and on SVR4 systems like Illumos it is
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
netstat -M
.Ed
.It Nm Ar show rp
Show PIM Rendezvous-Point (RP) set
.It Nm Ar show crp
Show PIM Candidate Rendezvous-Point (CRP) set.
.It Nm Ar show compat
Show PIM status, compat mode.  Previously available as
.Nm pimd Fl r ,
as well as sending SIGUSR1 to the daemon to get output in
.Pa /var/run/pimd/pimd.dump .
These methods are no longer available, only this compat command remains.
.It Nm Ar show pim Op detail
Modern variant of the
.Cm show compat
command.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/pimd.sock -compact
.It Pa /var/run/pimd.sock
.Ux Ns -domain
socket used for communication with
.Xr pimd 8
.El
.Pp
Note, the basename used changes when running with a different identity,
.Fl i Ar NAME ,
or when another PIM daemon from the same family is found.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pimd 8 ,
.Xr pimdd 8 ,
.Xr pim6sd 8 ,
.Xr /usr/share/doc/pimd/
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm pimd
was originally written by Ahmed Helmy, George Edmond "Rusty" Eddy, and
Pavlin Ivanov Radoslavov.  PIM-SSM, including full IGMPv3 support, was
added by Markus Veranen.  With contributions by many others.
.Pp
.Nm
was written by Joachim Wiberg.
