.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.Dd Oct 17, 2020
.Dt PIMD.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pimd.conf
.Nd pimd configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/pimd.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
In many cases you do not need to configure
.Nm pimd .
It configures itself automatically to forward multicast on all
multicast-capable interfaces, i.e., interfaces that have the
.Cm IFF_MULTICAST
flag set.  It locates other PIM-SM/SSM capable routers directly
reachable via those interfaces.
.Pp
.Nm pimd
will not start with less than two enabled virtual interfaces (VIFs).  A
VIF is either a physical multicast-capable interface or a tunnel.  To
override the default settings, for example to disable some interfaces
from being used, configuration commands may be placed in
.Pa /etc/pimd.conf .
.Pp
The file format is relatively free-form: whitespace (including newlines)
is not significant.  However, the order of some statements are
important, more on this below.
.Pp
All
.Ar <len>
arguments to an IPv4 address, group or network can also be given in the
alternative /CIDR format.  E.g.,
.Ar <group>/<len> .
.Pp
By default,
.Nm pimd
runs on all multicast capable interfaces.  The optional
.Cm no phyint
setting and the
.Cm phyint
setting can be used to control this behavior.  More on the
.Cm phyint
interface configuration setting below.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm default-route-distance Ar <1-255>
This option has nothing to do with the system default route.  It is the
default value for the unicast routing protocol's administrative
distance.  It is used in PIM Assert elections to determine upstream
routers.  Currently
.Nm pimd
cannot obtain the admin distance and metric from the unicast routing
protocols, so a default routing protocol distance may be configured.
The RFC confusingly refers to this as
.Em metric prefererence .
In a PIM Assert election, the router advertising the lowest assert
preference will be selected as the forwarder and upstream router for the
LAN.  Setting 101 should be sufficiently high so that asserts from Cisco
or GateD routers are preferred over poor-little pimd.
.Pp
It is recommended that distances be set such that metrics are never
consulted.
.It Cm default-route-metric Ar <1-1024>
This setting control the default routing metrics.  Again, this has
nothing to do with the system default route.  This item sets the default
cost for sending data through this router.  You want only PIM-SM data to
go to this daemon; so once again, a high value is recommended to prevent
accidental usage.  The preferred default value is 1024.  Both defaults
can be overridden per
.Cm phyint ,
so learned routes, or PIM Asserts use the
.Cm phyint 's
values.
.Pp
Please note that PIM Assert elections are not the same as the DR
election.  The PIM Assert election determines the active multicast
forwarder, whereas the DR election determines the active PIM router.
.It Cm igmp-query-interval Ar <1-65535>
This setting controls the interval between IGMP querys (QI).  It is used
only when acting as the elected IGMP querier on a LAN.  In IGMP the
lowest numerical address on the LAN becomes the elected querier.  This
value must be same across all IGMP capable devices on the same LAN!
Including any IGMP snooping switches (bridges) that can act as IGMP
querier.
.Pp
The query response interval (QRI) is hard-coded to 10 seconds, so in
practice, the query interval should not be less than that.  Also, at
startup
.Nm
sends the first queries at a quicker interval (QI / 4) to speed up
inital convergence.
.Pp
Default value, per RFC2236: 125
.It Cm igmp-querier-timeout Ar <8-65535>
This setting controls the amount of time that
.Nm pimd
must wait to determine any previous IGMP querier (multicast router) has
been lost.  RFC2236 calls this the "Other Querier Present Interval" and
recommends it be set to a robustness value times the query interval,
plus half the query response time.  The
.Nm pimd
robustness value for IGMP is 3 and the default query response time is 10
sec.  This value must be same across all IGMP capable devices on the
same LAN!  Including any IGMP snooping switches (bridges) that can act
as IGMP querier.
.Pp
Default value, per RFC2236: 380
.It Cm hello-interval Ar <30-18724>
The PIM Hello message interval can be tuned by changing this setting.
It also affects the hold-time value included in Hello messages.  The
hold-time value is 3.5 times hello-interval.  Anything less than 30 sec
is considered an "aggressive" setting and is unsupported.
.Pp
Default value: 30 sec.
.It Cm no phyint
This setting controls if
.Nm pimd
should start up with all multicast-capable interfaces as
.Em enabled
or
.Em disabled .
For more information, see the description of
.Cm phyint ,
below.
.It Cm phyint Ar <address | ifname> Oo Cm disable | enable Oc Oo Cm igmpv2 | igmpv3 Oc Oo Cm dr-priority Ar <1-4294967294> Oc Oo Cm ttl-threshold Ar <1-255> Oc Oo Cm distance Ar <1-255> Oc Oo Cm metric Ar <1-1024> Oc Oo Cm altnet Ar network Ns / Ns Ar len | Ar network Cm masklen Ar len Oc Oo Cm scoped Ar network Ns / Ns Ar len | Ar network Cm masklen Ar len Oc
.Pp
This setting selects and alters properties of the phyiscal interfaces
.Nm pimd
operates on.  Interfaces can be identified using their local IP address
or their name.
.Pp
.Sy NOTE: All
.Cm phyint
commands must come after the
.Cm default-route-metric
and
.Cm default-route-distance
settings in the configuration file.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm disable | Cm enable
Selectively disable or enable this interface.  Only enabled interfaces
get a VIF in the kernel.
.It Cm igmpv2 | Cm igmpv3
Force interface to use IGMPv2 or IGMPv3.  Default:
.Cm igmpv3
since v2.3.0.
.It Cm dr-priority Ar <1-4294967294>
When there are multiple PIM routers on the same LAN the DR is usually
elected based on the highest numerical IP address.  This setting can be
used to control the DR Priority option in PIM Hellow messages, which by
default otherwise is 1.  When the DR Priority option is advertised by
.Em all
PIM routers on the same LAN the highest priority router wins the DR
election, regardless of its IP.  If any router does
.Em not
advertise the DR Priority option, or the same priority is advertised by
more than one router, the protocol falls back to using the IP address.
.It Cm ttl-threshold Ar <1-255>
The TTL threshold for multicast frames to be forwarded from this
interface.  Useful for defining boundaries for local, site, and global
multicast.  This is often referred to as TTL scoping.  Default: 1
.It Cm distance Ar <1-255>
Use this to override the
.Cm default-route-distance
(101) on this
.Cm phyint
in PIM Assert elections.
.It Cm metric Ar <1-1024>
The cost of sending data through this interface.  Defaults to
.Cm default-route-metric
(1024) if not assigned.
.It Cm altnet Ar <network/len>
Alternative host(s)/network(s) to accept as locally attached multicast
sources on a given interface. If a phyint is attached to multiple IP
subnets, describe each additional subnet with the altnet keyword.
.It Cm scoped Ar <network/len>
Optional scoping of multicast groups.  This allows interfaces to be
configured as an administrative boundary for the specified group(s).
Multicast streams belonging to the scoped groups will not be forwarded.
.El
.It Cm bsr-candidate Oo Ar address | Ar ifname Oc Oo Cm priority Ar <0-255> Oc
The
.Cm bsr-candidate
(CBSR) setting is enabled in the default configuration file.  It can be
disabled by commenting it out, but make sure at least one bootstrap
router (BSR) is available in the network.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm address | ifname
Optional local IPv4 address, or interface name to acquire address from.
If both address and ifname is left out,
.Nm pimd
will default to the highest active IP address.
.It Cm priority Ar <0-255>
How important this router is compared to others.  A larger numeric value
denotes higher priority, c.f.
.Cm rp-candidate
where it's the reverese.
.El
.It Cm rp-candidate Oo Ar address | Ar ifname Oc Oo Cm priority Ar <0-255> Oc Oo Cm interval Ar <10-16384> Oc Oo Cm group-prefix Ar group Ns / Ns Ar len | Cm masklen Ar len Oc
The
.Cm rp-candidate
(CRP) setting is enabled in the default configuration file.  It can be
disabled by commenting out the line, but make sure there is at least one
Rendez-vous Point (RP) on the network, if you use PIM-SM.  See
.Cm rp-address
(below) for how to configure a static RP.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Cm address | ifname
Optional local IPv4 address, or interface name to acquire address from.
If both address and ifname is left out,
.Nm pimd
will default to the highest active IP address.
.It Cm priority Ar <0-255>
A smaller numeric value denotes higher priorty, c.f.
.Cm bsr-candidate
where it's the reverse.  If the priority is omitted
.Nm pimd
and Cisco IOS default to 0, the standard says 192 for RP.
.It Cm interval Ar <10-16383>
The advertisement interval in seconds for this CRP.  The default value
is 30 seconds.  Use a lower value for faster convergence.
.It Cm group-prefix Oo Oo Ar group Ns / Ns Ar len Oc | Oo Ar group Cm masklen Ar len Oc Oc
The
.Cm group-prefix
option is the set of multicast groups that the CRP will advertise to
other routers, if it wins an election:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 1n
.It Ar group Ns / Ns Ar len
A specific multicast group, or network range in CIDR syntax this router
will handle.
.It Ar group Cm masklen Ar len
Optional number of groups, in prefix length format. Remember that a
multicast address is a Class D and has a netmask of 240.0.0.0, which
means its length is 4.
.El
.Pp
Multiple lines of
.Cm group-prefix
may be given, but the maximum number of records supported in
.Nm pimd
is 255.
.El
.It Cm rp-address Ar address Oo Ar group-addr Ns / Ns Ar len | Ar group-addr Cm masklen Ar len Oc
This setting is for static rendezvous point (RP) configurations.  It
defines the RP for a given group, or range of groups.  The argument can
be either a unicast address or a multicast group, with an optional group
address and netmask.  Default group and netmask is 224.0.0.0/16.
.Sy Note:
all static RP's are announced with priority 1 (second highest, see above).
.It Cm spt-threshold Oo Cm rate Ar KBPS | Cm packets Ar NUM | Cm infinity Oc Oo Cm interval Ar SEC Oc
This replaces two previous configuration settings:
.Cm switch_data_threshold
and
.Cm switch_register_threshold .
It controls the switch-over from the shared tree to the shortest-path
source tree.  The default is to do the switch-over after the first
packet, but only after 100 seconds.  If
.Ar infinity
is specified the shortest path switch-over is disabled.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/lib/pimd.genid -compact
.It Pa /etc/pimd.conf
Main configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pimd 8 ,
.Xr pimd-dense 8 ,
.Xr pimctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Joachim Wiberg Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com .
